---
layout: post
title: "Translating Is Damn Hard"
date: 2013-01-27 12:44
comments: true
categories: [language, chinese]
---

As most people I always have issues with learning new languages and also with
using translation tools like [Google](http://translate.google.com). The thing
is, as a foreigner (or a program) you never seem to figure out, how to actually
say something the way a mothertounge speaker would.

I just experienced a very typical example of this. I talked with a Chinese
friend of mine about the topic of culture shock. Everybody experiences it, when
being in a very different country for about half a year. Yet you also seem to
have to go through this, to really experience the new culture. So I told her to
relax and just "wait and see". In Germany we say "Abwarten und Tee trinken", to
wait and drink tea. Both sentences, English and German, focus around patience.
Even though it is not a literal translation, it is possible to see that a
translation tool can get this.

Now when you translate it to Chinese, you would like to say something equally
about waiting and being patient (maybe "wait and eat sausage"?). But Chinese
think completely differently. For Chinese people it is not about doing

a. something hasty and fast or
b. something patiently and thoughtful.

For Chinese the world focusses more around, things you **can** do and things
you **can't** do. In Chinese eyes there are two many other influences like 
luck, fate, what you have done in your previous life and so on. So, why bother?
If you can't change something, there is no reason to worry about it. So instead
of talking about patience, a Chinese would just realise that you can't do
anything about it. So he would probably say "没办法", "can't do anything about
it".

And this is, what makes it so hard to translate. 2 different cultures
understand the world from a different point of view. Even if the situation
around them might be the same, inside they experience something different. If
you really want to translate well, you need to understand from the first
language, what happened around the author from the input text, that made him
say it exactly this way. Then you must assume, how the same situation would
influence a person from the target culture. Last but not least, you have to
know how a person of the target culture reacts to the interpretation he has
come to.

Most language classes and translation tools only focus around memorizing
grammar rules and applying direct translations, i.e. "the" in English means
"der, die, das" in German. The reason, why people are more successful at this
task then computers, is that computers only do what you tell them, while brains
always do what they think is right, no matter what you tell them.

I want to make the case, that both, learning languages and programming
translation software, is flawed. It's just that our brains don't care and
without telling us, they actually do the right thing: They create a model of
the other cultures world, that we can understand and although it might not be
100% correct, it still helps to predict what a mothertounge speaker would say.
The computers on the other hand only try to figure out, how a word or word
group might match another word group, linear and simple.
